 
                                    Data Structures

These are programming construct which stores a collection of data items.
These are not just an extension of Composite data types.
The data structures encompasses both primitive and composite data types.
The data structues include some kind of relation between the data items.
For example string has definite order of organized characters.

Linear Data Structures. 

A structure in which the data elements are organized in sequence belong to Linear type.
Examples are Arrays, Linked Lists, Stacks and queues.
Linked List consits of data items called nodes. Each data item constains two fields.
A stack works on the principle of LIFO.
A queue works on the principle of FIFO.

Non-Linear Data Structures.

Here the relation among data elements can be hierarchial
Link may be single or bi-directional
Common examples are trees and graphs
A tree consists of a set of data items called nodes.
Tree contains an information field and a link field,which is address of related element.
Trees can be binary, A V L, Red and Black, Splay,B-Trees or heap
Graph is set of data items,called vertices or nodes, connected by links termed as edges or arcs.

Operations on Data Structures

In order to process all the elements in a data structure some operations have to be performed on it
A basic operation involves creating a data structure and reserving storage space for the elements.
Another operation is deleting the data structure which removes the data items and releases the allocated space.
Other common operations include Sorting, Inserting, Searching , Merging and Traversing.

Inserting involves adding a data item in a specified position
Sorting is arranging of data items in specific order
Searching is finding an element which matches the given key.
Merging is combining two sets of data according to given criteria.
Traversing is accessing each element of data structure atleast once.

The strength of a data structure is described by its nature and the number of operations performed on it.


User Defined Data Structures:

Stacks, queues and trees are classical general purpose data structures.
Some programming languages provide built-in support for some of these structures.
Along with these we can also create our own data structures which are called user defined data structures.


Storage Structures:

It describes how the data elements are stored in the memory
Elements can be stored in consecutive or disjoint storage locations.
Each Location is identifies by unique number called memory address.
To access any element its address is needed






